README.md, before:

# video-autosize

**The challenge:** I saw an [interesting challenge](https://twitter.com/matthen2/status/1483160741222006788?s=20) posed in a Tweet. In this challenge, you are streaming a video pixel-by-pixel, but do not know the dimensions (width and height) of the video. How do you figure out the width and height automatically?

**Status:** I implemented two solution that were proposed on Twitter, finding that JPEG compression reliably detects the *width* but not the *height* of videos, while local derivatives can reliably detect both. I have grown bored with this project, but this repository includes a general enough evaluation tool that other algorithms could be implemented and tested in the future.

# The ideal approach

To succeed at the challenge, we must settle on a distribution `p(X)` over videos `X`. For example, if the videos are randomly sampled TV static, we cannot infer anything about the original resolution since all pixels are independent of each other. However, if we assume the videos are from some natural distribution (e.g. videos of the natural world taken on a camera), then larger-scale statistics will likely tip off the resolution of the video.

If this sounds like a machine learning problem, that's because it can be setup as one. In particular, we can only test algorithms in the context of some video distribution. We can represent the video distribution as a dataset of videos, and test an algorithm's success rate using a validation set of videos. We don't necessarily have to train our algorithm on a training set of videos--we could hardcode algorithms as well. But we still can't know if we've coded something reasonable until we test it on a validation set.

# Results

I downloaded a handful of short videos from the [Kinetics-700](https://deepmind.com/research/open-source/kinetics) dataset and encoded them as numpy arrays. [data.py](video_autosize/data.py) includes code for downloading and iterating over these videos.

I started by implementing an algorithm [proposed on Twitter](https://twitter.com/adad8m/status/1483281970545434626), where we JPEG compress frames of the video to determine the proper resolution. At correct resolutions, the compression works much better, since it was designed for a distribution of natural images.

While the JPEG algorithm works really well for finding the width of the video, it is not good at finding the height in my experience. In particular, JPEG often compressed multiple frames stacked on top of each other better than it compresses them separately--likely because of some overhead from starting a new file (or perhaps JPEG can leverage global statistics in the image?).

Another suggested approach [on Twitter](https://twitter.com/memotv/status/1483165312946040833) was to look at derivatives of small kernels. I decided to try the simplest possible thing: look at the MSE between pixels and their neighbors along each dimension (for most pixels there are six neighbors: two along each of the x, y, and time axes). This method seems to be overly sensitive near width=0 (e.g. width=11), so it only works if we constrain the videos to a minimum width (I used 64 pixels). I found that this method reliably detects both width and height, likely because it can take temporal information into account unlike the JPEG algorithm.

Commit message:

evaluate methods on whole test set

README.md, after:

# video-autosize

**The challenge:** I saw an [interesting challenge](https://twitter.com/matthen2/status/1483160741222006788?s=20) posed in a Tweet. In this challenge, you are streaming a video pixel-by-pixel, but do not know the dimensions (width and height) of the video. How do you figure out the width and height automatically?

**Status:** I implemented two solution that were proposed on Twitter, finding that JPEG compression reliably detects the *width* but not the *height* of videos, while local derivatives can reliably detect both. I have grown bored with this project, but this repository includes a general enough evaluation tool that other algorithms could be implemented and tested in the future.

# The ideal approach

To succeed at the challenge, we must settle on a distribution `p(X)` over videos `X`. For example, if the videos are randomly sampled TV static, we cannot infer anything about the original resolution since all pixels are independent of each other. However, if we assume the videos are from some natural distribution (e.g. videos of the natural world taken on a camera), then larger-scale statistics will likely tip off the resolution of the video.

If this sounds like a machine learning problem, that's because it can be setup as one. In particular, we can only test algorithms in the context of some video distribution. We can represent the video distribution as a dataset of videos, and test an algorithm's success rate using a validation set of videos. We don't necessarily have to train our algorithm on a training set of videos--we could hardcode algorithms as well. But we still can't know if we've coded something reasonable until we test it on a validation set.

# Getting data

I downloaded a handful of short videos from the [Kinetics-700](https://deepmind.com/research/open-source/kinetics) dataset and encoded them as numpy arrays. [data.py](video_autosize/data.py) includes code for downloading and iterating over these videos.

# Methods

**JPEG method:** I started by implementing an algorithm [proposed on Twitter](https://twitter.com/adad8m/status/1483281970545434626), where we JPEG compress frames of the video to determine the proper resolution. At correct resolutions, the compression works much better, since it was designed for a distribution of natural images.

**Deltas method:** Another suggested approach [on Twitter](https://twitter.com/memotv/status/1483165312946040833) was to look at derivatives of small kernels. I decided to try the simplest possible thing: look at the MSE between pixels and their neighbors along each dimension (for most pixels there are six neighbors: two along each of the x, y, and time axes).

# Results

I evaluated the above methods on 10 validation videos, supplying 3.5 frames of each video. I record the total success rate, as well as the success rate for predicting width and height separately.

| Method | Width success rate | Height success rate | Both success rate |
|--------|--------------------|---------------------|-------------------|
| JPEG   | 10/10              | 1/10                | 1/10              |
| Deltas | 9/10               | 7/10                | 7/10              |

While the JPEG algorithm works really well for finding the width of a video, it is not good at finding the height in my experience. In particular, JPEG often compressed multiple frames stacked on top of each other better than it compresses them separately--likely because of some overhead from starting a new file (or perhaps JPEG can leverage global statistics in the image?).

I noticed in early experiments that the deltas method seems to be overly sensitive near width=0 (e.g. width=11), so it only works if we constrain the videos to a minimum width (I used 64 pixels). I found that this method more reliably detects height as well as width, likely because it can take temporal information into account.

The deltas method is still not perfect, sometimes even predicting slightly incorrect widths (for one video with a somewhat constant wooden background, it predicted width 641 instead of 640). When it incorrectly predicts height, it is usually off by only a few pixels. Probable explanation: if the camera is panning vertically, predicting the wrong height could make subsequent frames look _more_ similar on average by undoing the panning effect.
